# Course-project-NYPD-misconduct
This is a course project focuses on the misconduct complaints against the NYPD, investigating questions related to the disciplinary actions given to police officers accused of various types of misconduct. Two core questions for this project project are: _**What factors explain whether police officers are penalized or not for their misconduct?**_ And _**in these officers who got penalties, what factors explain the different penalties given to police officers?**_

The [NYPD Misconduct Complaint Database](https://www.nyclu.org/data/nypd-misconduct-database), constructed by the New York Civil Liberties Union (NYCLU), will serve as the primary dataset for this project. This dataset includes 302,801 unique complaint records covering 107,187 incidents since 2000. It features basic descriptions of incidents, such as complaint categories and associated allegations. More importantly, it records the names of police officers involved in misconduct, as well as the types of NYPD penalties imposed on these officers. Additionally, this dataset includes demographic information regarding the race of both officers and impacted individuals, which enables the analysis of interactions between different racial groups. The raw data can be accessed from the GitHub repository [here](https://github.com/new-york-civil-liberties-union/NYPD-Misconduct-Complaint-Database-Updated).

By adopting both regression models and decision tree models, this pilot project reveals the complexities of police behaviors. The results from the regression models reveal two interesting implications. First, managerial officers may be more likely to receive discipline, and incidents involving older populations, males, or abuse of authority might be more frequently determined as requiring police agencies to administer penalties to officers. Secondly, by introducing a time-fixed effect in the linear probability model, no significant racial effect on discipline outcomes was found. This absence may result not only from the heterogeneous effects among racial groups, but also from increased caution exercised by officers in racially charged encounters.

Regarding the decision tree models, the results illustrate the dynamics and interactions among discipline types and several critical conditions, such as age, sex mismatch, race, the presence of force in an incident, and the officers' ranks. More importantly, in the decision tree model that includes year variables, it shows the possible temporal effects on the discipline types that might be given to officers under different time spans. It is worth examining what triggers these changes over different time frames and how the linkage between policing strategies (e.g., policing guidelines) exercised in different periods influences discipline outcomes.

This pilot project is not without limitations. Data limitations are the most prevalent in this study. For example, information on impacted persons is mostly self-reported, and missing values are common in these variables. As observed in the regression models, we could only retain 154,460 observations in our statistical analysis, meaning nearly half of the dataset was excluded due to missing values. Another limitation might stem from relying solely on a single dataset. 

Moreover, the decisions on penalties and discipline types might be influenced by many variables not included in this dataset, such as internal investigation reports or judicial documents related to the incidents. It is possible, yet challenging, for future studies to incorporate different types of datasets to provide more evidence to explain the outcomes of police officers' disciplines, in both regression models and decision tree models. 

Lastly, some text-based variables, such as penalty types or allegation types, might be too loosely defined, and the current dataset does not contain more detailed information about these variables. If more comprehensive descriptions of these variables become available, it might be feasible in the future to employ text-mining strategies to uncover insights that reflect the complex situations faced not only by police officers but also by impacted persons who initiated the complaints.
